---
title: "A professional life"
categories:
  - Blog
tags:
  - computing
---
In 2017, after retirement, I was asked by my old school, the [Anderson High School](https://blogs.glowscotland.org.uk/sh/anderson/) in Lerwick, to write something which an English class could use as material for a magazine or book. What follows is my submission to the class. I do not know if it ever was published in any meaningful sense.

### A professional life

I grew up in Voe in the early 60s, and started at the Anderson Educational Institute in 1967 aged 12.  We were Class 1H (for Hermaness - the other two classes were I think called Ronas and Noss), and our class teacher was the formidable Nessie Robertson.  I recall her as quite strict.  We were told in no uncertain terms that Shetland dialect was not acceptable, and we should talk to our teachers in “proper English”!  Not a problem for me, my mother being English.  It took a while to adapt not only to the secondary school environment, but also to living in lodgings through the week, returning home only at weekends.  Winter weather was sometimes an issue - heavy snowfall on Friday morning meant early release from school in the hope of getting home before the roads were impassable.  If the roads were blocked, it meant spending the weekend in Lerwick, with nothing to do.  However, heavy snow on Sunday was brilliant - it meant an extra day or two at home!

Exam nerves afflicted me at the end of the first term - I pretended to be ill and did not sit any exams!  But this soon passed, and gradually I got better at my lessons.  Science in the first floor labs in the “new” wing was a favourite, but languages were not my strong point.  One year of Latin was all I could stand, and my French was poor enough to put me in the “B” stream for O-level.  I remember French lessons with Miss Manson in the old part of the school - the desks were ancient and creaking.  On one memorable occasion, while the class was quietly working, there was almighty BANG as a desk seat gave way under the weight of a particularly large boy!

“Technical” subjects (Technical Drawing and Applied Mechanics) were at the opposite end of the school, in the furthest part of the new wing, and were much more to my taste.  We were taught how to use a slide rule, and T-square, protractor and other draughtsman’s tools - all now obsolete thanks to advances in technology!

Headmaster Willie Rhind retired in 1970, and the AEI merged with Lerwick Central School to form the Anderson High School, with John Graham in charge.  The Knab campus was dedicated to years 3 to 6, so it was there I took O-levels the following year.  For Highers I concentrated purely on science subjects (and mandatory English!), and developed a strong interest in physics.  Gary Williamson taught the subject, and I’ll always be grateful to him for lending me his copy of Feynman’s Lectures in Physics.  Although it was rather an advanced book for a sixteen-year-old, I found the famous Nobel prize winner’s lectures so interesting that I was determined to study physics at university.

At the end of fifth year, the person with the best average score in the mock Higher exams was honoured, and somehow I had scraped together enough points to be awarded a Dux
medal, jointly with Joyce Thomson - a primary-school classmate from Voe.

Sixth year was a bit more relaxed, and my social life became rather more active!  Rumours that I might have occasionally been found in a certain Lerwick pub when slightly under eighteen are of course pure speculation.  On one occasion there was a small fire in the school canteen, and pupils were dispatched to the old Central building for lunch.  Some mates and I decided instead to have lunch in a local hotel, where we each enjoyed half a pint of beer along with our meal.  The hotel owner, however, had seen us and reported our descriptions back to the school - that afternoon we were called to the Head’s office and given a severe dressing down!

Instead of the Sixth Year Studies physics curriculum, Gary Williamson decided to teach A-level physics.  I wonder if this was the first time an A-level exam had been sat in Shetland?

Sixth Year Studies Maths had a Computing option.  This was the first time I’d had exposure to the subject - little did I suspect that it would provide me with a career!  We wrote programs in a language called Fortran - still used for some scientific computing even today.  You wrote your program on “coding sheets”, which (since there was no computer in Shetland!) had to be posted away south.  About three weeks later you got back a printout of the results - if you had made an error, you had to re-write your coding sheets and wait another three weeks for the answer!

Later in the year, we had a trip to Aberdeen to work with the computer more directly.  We were able to type our own coding sheets on a “Teletype” terminal, which punched out a paper tape.  You took this to the computer operator, who put it through the computer’s paper tape reader.  The lights flashed, the magnetic tapes whirred, the noise reached a crescendo, and if you were lucky the printer (bigger than a chest freezer!) shuddered into life and your results spewed out.  Ahhh, those were the days of real computing!

Sixth year came to a close in 1973, and my time at the Anderson was over.  The next step was Aberdeen University for a four-year physics BSc honours course, then in 1977 I accepted a PhD studentship in low temperature physics at the University of St Andrews.  My research topic involved the behaviour of superfluid helium, and was mainly experimental with a little theoretical physics.  Much of my time seemed to be spent chasing down leaks in vacuum systems!  Nevertheless I was able to develop my interest in computing, using “glass teletypes” and punched cards rather than paper tape.

In 1980, to further develop my computing interest I joined the University of Edinburgh as a Research Associate, working on medical imaging software - particularly radionuclide imaging of hearts and lungs using a gamma camera.  We used an early 8-bit computer, which was “portable” in that it could be wheeled about on a special trolley.  It needed two people to lift it!  These days medical imaging technology is vastly more sophisticated and powerful, and is built into the camera equipment, but back in the early 80’s we were doing innovative stuff.

In 1982 I moved to the University’s Computing Service, taking on a Computing Officer role which involved advising academic departments how best to use computers to capture data from scientific experiments.  I championed the use of the “BBC Micro” (a small computer targeting the education market) and we ended up with several hundred of these machines across the University - many for general undergraduate rather than scientific use.

Various roles with increasing levels of responsibility followed over the next 15 years, mostly with a software development flavour.  The IBM Personal Computer and its clones became popular, eventually pushing out other hardware options.  Enabling computers to communicate became critical, and I worked on a number of projects delivering communications software for use across the UK academic community.

In 1990 I became aware of an innovative project called the World Wide Web, based in CERN in Geneva, and led by a guy called Tim Berners-Lee.  It looked promising, and I kept an eye on its development.  I remember chairing a fringe meeting at the Internet Engineering Task Force in Amsterdam in 1993, on delivering interactive multi-media applications over the Internet - after the meeting there was a short line of people waiting to chat with me, and Tim was at the end of the line.  We had an interesting conversation - he thought the Web would be a good vehicle for multi-media delivery.  Of course he was proved right!

Later in 1993 we were asked by Microsoft, who had just released their new “Windows NT” operating system, how they could encourage the academic community to use it.  One of my colleagues had the bright idea of creating a “European Microsoft Windows Academic Centre” (EMWAC) based at the University of Edinburgh, and Microsoft gave us some money to set it up.

While the World Wide Web was seeing increasing use in academia, it was (relatively speaking) still in its infancy, and only certain kinds of computer could run the software for hosting a website.  Therefore, part of our job at EMWAC was to develop web server software for Windows NT.  This fell to me, and it did not take long to produce the first version.  Encouraged by occasional messages from Tim, further versions followed just as the technical folk in some big corporations were starting to take an interest in this newfangled Web stuff.  The EMWAC web server was eagerly taken up across the world, and I was kept busy with bug fixes and enhancements.  The very earliest websites run by the BBC and by Microsoft itself used the EMWAC server.

Around this time, Tim emailed to say he planned to employ a few associates, and would I like to come and work with him in Geneva?  Reluctantly, for personal reasons, I declined.  Sometimes I wonder how different life would have been if I had decided to accept!  Tim is of course now Professor Sir Timothy Berners-Lee OM, based at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  I’m sure he does not remember me!

Somehow I was invited to join the Program Committee of the Fifth International World-Wide Web Conference in Paris, and subsequently the sixth conference in Santa Clara the following year.  It was interesting to be involved in the process of selecting academic papers for conference presentation.

The University had retained the intellectual property rights to the EMWAC web software, and we were able to license it to a company based in Boston, who marketed an enhanced version.  We even tried to license it back to Microsoft, and I wined and dined one of their executives in Seattle trying to smooth the deal.  However, they played their cards close to their chest, and the following year they brought out their own web server software called IIS, which became part of Windows NT and effectively eliminated the need for the EMWAC server.

The European Commission was at this time setting up a research programme on “Information Engineering”, which actually meant electronic publishing.  I was asked to advise, and went several times to Luxembourg and Brussels to participate in discussions and help set the parameters of the research programme.  With colleagues in the Institute of Physics and various other publishing-related organisations, we were subsequently able to attract some EC funding for pre-competitive research on the electronic publication of academic papers - something which is now completely routine.

I had also developed an email server for Windows NT, and we licensed this to companies in the UK, the US, Canada and Japan.  I became closely involved with one licensee, Rockliffe Systems Inc based in Silicon Valley, and was for a while their (part-time, honorary!) Vice President of Research and Development.  A much-enhanced version of the email server is still actively sold and developed under the name “Mailsite”.

In 1998 I was asked to join the Computing Service’s senior management team, initially with responsibility for commercial operations, then with a wider service portfolio to look after.  I managed to cling on to a technical role as well until about 2002 when my time became fully taken up with management responsibilities.  In 2006 I was appointed Academic Liaison Director to the College of Science and Engineering at the University,  providing a strategic link between the College and the Information Services Group.  This role covered not only Information Technology but also Library services and eLearning, although it has to be said that most of my effort went into the IT side!

In 2010, after various reorganisations, I took on the leadership of a couple of teams in the new IT Infrastructure Division of Information Services, merging them into a single section, and became Deputy Director of the Division.  The service portfolio included the University’s wired and wireless data network and the telephone service, as well as a couple of external services: a regional network service connecting several east of Scotland academic institutions; and the UK-wide academic videoconferencing service.  I was involved at national level in various initiatives, including latterly as Vice Chair of the national academic networking committee.  Finally, in 2015 aged 60, I decided to retire after 35 years service at the University of Edinburgh.  

Looking back at this story of my fifty years since starting at the Anderson, most of it deals with highlights and career successes.  There were of course many mis-steps, embarrassments, missed opportunities and outright failures which don’t get a mention!  And of course much of any career is spent in the humdrum necessities of the daily grind.  Nevertheless, I have been lucky enough to participate in the early days of so much technology which we now take for granted.  May you, young reader, when you leave the Anderson High School, be even more fortunate in whatever you choose to do!

Dr Chris Adie\
October 2017
